# Server-Side Rendering

Not all parts of a view need to be rendered in the browser for a web
application to do its thing. We want Spheres to support a variety
of rendering approaches so that a developer can choose the right one
for the job, considering the associated tradeoffs.

By 'server-side rendering' I mean any rendering approach that first
creates a representation of the web application, including any state
necessary for the initial render, on the server and converts it to
HTML text that is sent to the browser as (part of) the response to
the browser's request for a web page. This is in contrast to 'client-side
rendering' where the web application is rendered always only in the
browser and the server simply provides data via apis and static
assets like an HTML shell, JS, stylesheets, and so on.

Server-side rendering introduces the need to run some JS on the browser
to 'activate' the web application once it gets there. This is typically
called 'hydration' but I'll call it 'activation'. This need is due to
some limitations in HTML -- namely that event handlers (or not all
event handlers) cannot be represented declaratively in the HTML document.
Plus, spheres makes this more difficult because state tokens are JS
objects -- so for the application to work, it must have reference to some
JS objects which are used to reference data in the store.

There are two main cases we want to consider: SSR and SSR with streaming data.

### SSR

For simple server-side rendering, we assume that the initial state of the application
is rendered into HTML. In order to activate the view, we will run some
JS on the client after the HTML has been loaded. In order for this JS to
work correctly, we need the store used on the client when activating the app
to have the same data as the store used on the server to render the initial
state. So, on the client, we will need to do two things: (1) run some javascript
to set the initial state of the store to be what it was on the server when the app
was first rendered, and (2) run some javascript to use the store and the relevant
view functions to activate the view. 

In order to do (1) we need to somehow provide the data that was used on the server
to the client. We could, of course, have the client fetch the data just like the server
did -- but this is a waste when we've already fetched that data on the server and
would surely be a slower approach. So, to support (1) we will include the data
fetched on the server in the HTML sent to the client and then the JS will parse
that data and insert it into the store on the client.

While our implementation may change, the approach we're using to include the data
in the HTML is to create a `script` tag of type `application/json` and then just
put the stringified data in it. This means that we can only use data that can be
serialized to JSOn when initially rendering the store. We should only need to
serialize data from containers and their associated meta state, since derived state
should just be recalculated on the client based on data in containers. Furthermore,
since state tokens are just JS objects, we need some serializable identifier
to specify which token the data should be associated with. And this serializable
identifier needs to be available both on the server (when serializing) and on
the client (when deserializing). We will just use a JS object to represent this
mapping -- between a string and the token instance.

So, when we want to activate the view, we will run some javascript that first looks
for this special script tag, then creates a store with this data, and then uses
that store to activate the view. This means that there is an order that things must
occur in: we cannot have the activation script run before the data script tag has
been processed. In simple SSR cases we can ensure this by marking the activation
script as `type="module"` which will automatically defer it so that it is evaluated
only after the dom has been loaded.

### SSR with Streaming

We can improve on the simple SSR approach in one way: we don't necessarily need to
wait for all the data to load on the server before we start sending HTML to the
client. We can send HTML that represents some 'pending' state which the browser
can render and when the data has been loaded on the server, we can then send it
to the browser which can then use that to update the view. We call this
'streaming' because the entire process occurs over one response. By using the
'chunked' transfer type, we can send parts of the HTML document, which the browser
will render (with some caveats -- see below). And as we get more data, we can
send that in another chunk which will be added to the DOM. This allows us to
start rendering and *activation* on the client while the data is being fetched
by the server.

The implementation is similar to the simple case. Indeed, we still must pass any
initial store state to the browser before we activate the view. The initial
store state would typically use Meta state to indicate which tokens are
pending (because their data is being fetched) or in error (because the
data fetch failed).

When streaming, however, we need to evaluate the JS to activate the view as soon
as possible so that we can then just write new data to the store as it streams
in and see the view update accordingly. To accomplish this, the script tag with
the initial store state will be written to the dom first and then a script tag
with the activation script will be written second -- both of these script tags
should appear at the end of the `body` tag so that the browser will have already
processed the main parts of the DOM (the body tag content). And then, the
activation script tag must be marked as `async` so that it evaluates as soon
as possible without blocking any incoming, streamed data. 

This means that again we need to be careful about ordering. The activation
script must distinguish between the scipt tag with initial store state, and then
any script tags with streamed data that arrived before the activation script
was loaded and evaluated. And then it needs to process any script tags with
streaming data that arrive *after* activation has completed. (We use a
MutationObserver to track these incoming script tags as they are added to the
DOM). When the data has been loaded on the server and streamed to the client,
then the response in complete.

This works to stream data from a single store as it loads on the server. But
a web page could have many spheres views with different stores. We will call
a `Zone` one or more views that all use a single distinct store. In practice,
it's not clear exactly why it would be useful to have multiple zones on a
web page, but it's possible nonetheless. The SSR with Streaming approach
supports streaming multiple zones by using the zone's store id to associate
streaming data (and initial store data) with the appropriate store.

### Benefits

This approach seems to work so far and has a few benefits:
- We can send minimal HTML at first and start activation as soon as possible.
And since there is minimal HTML, the activation process has less work to do.
- We can send data (which we would have to do in any case) and have the
client do any rendering that results from this data. In other words, we don't
need to re-render on the server and send diffs to the client or anything like
that.
- We can handle pending states and error states by having the view depend
on the meta state of the appropriate tokens. For example, if some data fails
to be fetched, a Meta error state can be streamed back to the client.

### Caveats

Note that while SSR Streaming works fine with Chrome, it won't
immediately work with Safari. It needs something like 512 bytes of data somehow
and it also somehow needs to cover some space in the viewport before it will
begin to render chunks.

Adding the following will force safari to begin rendering:

```
el.children
  .div(el => {
    el.config.style("width: 0px; height: 0px")
    el.children.textNode('\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b\u200b')
  })
```

If the initial page is large anyway, you might not need this. This isn't a caveat with
the spheres approach to streaming; it's more a caveat with streaming in general.

Also, if you are streaming multiple zones, each zone needs to have its
own activation script. Otherwise a zone could be activated before
all the initial parts of the dom are present (from each of the zones) including
the initial state for the store associated with that zone, since zones stream
independently.